Mrs. Grace Jackson, Bryan, Texas, 83 years old,
interviewed Monday, 24th of March, 1975, by Adela
Lopez and Jim Crisp.
Excuse me, Mrs. Jackson, could you tell us just a
little bit about where you're from or a little bit
about yourself or what brought you here in the
first place? How far back? Where I'm from?
Directly? Yes, ma'am. To here? Oh, we came here
from Rush, Texas. That's where the insane asylum
is. I'm glad to get out.
Pardon? Where is Rust? Rust? It's in East Texas.
East Texas? Close to Kilgore and Henderson,
around that territory. Is that where y'all's
family was from before? No, no, no. You see, my
husband was a Methodist minister, and that's why I
asked you how far back I must go, because we were
gypsies. We went wherever the bishop sent us. We
just gypsied from the coast all over the world, you
know, to different places. That was where we came
from here. Where was your... Family from? Okay,
from Arkansas. Arkansas. Lead Hill, Arkansas,
that's right. And then we spent most of our lives at
the Fed of Arkansas, where the Razorbacks are,
that whipped us in the basketball, and we didn't
like it.
Joe, what caused Joe? To come here just because a
bishop sent you here? Yes. They changed at that
time. It was a rule in our church that we move every
four years. So when our four years was up at Russ,
they sent us here. They appointed us here. We had no
idea where we would go until we went to conference.
And when they sent us, they told us that it was a
boys' school and they were sending us here
primarily to work with the boys. And you'll be
surprised to know there's only 900 here then. And I
thought, oh my soul, 900 boys, what'll I do with
them? And they were all khaki-clad then, you know.
And it was, well, it was just military. But I
decided the only thing I could do would be to just
make a Christian home for them. And most of them
called me mom. And they felt just as free to come to
my kitchen and go to my refrigerator as they did in
their own homes. Are you referring to the boys out
of A&M? Referring to the boys of A&M. And what a
change there's been since then. And there was just
900 boys? Just 900 boys. But I thought I never saw as
many boys in all my life. And for things that, you
know, people weren't as fluent then as they are
now. Very few of them had cars. So we had open house
for them on Wednesday night. They were out. They
could stay out later. See... At that time, they
just did everything between military pistols.
But they could stay out later on Wednesday nights
and on Sunday nights. So those were the nights that
I had them in my home. And we just played all kinds of
games and did things like that. And I will say this.
I never had one to cross my threshold that wasn't a
perfect gentleman. And that's saying a lot. In
four years' time, They never used a cuss word. They
were never. And another thing that we were so proud
of at that time, oh, a big class distinction. You
know, freshman, senior, what have you. But when
they came to our house, everybody was on a level. We
had no seniors. We had no freshmen. We were just all
one. We enjoyed our work with them so much. And we
had them, I remember one night down there, I forget
how many countries there was representing. Oh,
just Afghanistan, and Pakistan, and India, and
Japan, and China. They were just from all over the
world. These two plaques here, and that one over
there is from Japan. These are from China. And
those people are great on giving gifts. And they
all went home for Christmas and these boys were so
far away they couldn't get there and back if they
had the money to go. It cost something to go that
far. So we bought the biggest turkey we could find
and had 12 of them down home. That's just about all I
could accommodate them on for dinner. And you
know, I got gifts for the rest of the time we was
here. Every Christmas they'd send me, they'd
still send me gifts. And these are some of them.
This was a beautiful dress. You know, they were all
married. They were married, their people married
them. They were like the ten, who did they call
them? You know what I'm trying to say? They had
matchmakers, you know, over there at 12 and 10. So
this was the dress that one of their wives
selected. It fit her. He said I was about the size of
his wife. And we used it for all the dances. And the
girls would borrow it and have the pictures made.
They were just running it. So I had it cut up, the
skirt. I still have the blouse, perfectly
beautiful. What
was it like when you first got here? Oh! It looked
like a desert. A desert? Well, yes. We came from
East Texas, from these trees everywhere and
houses. You know, it was a... It was just a place
where everybody lived. And we got out here. There
wasn't anything here but the college and that old
main building. And the post office was clear
across the railroad track over there, way across
the railroad track, and a place just about as big as
this living room. My husband got that changed. And
there was no houses on this side of the campus at
all, the north gate. There's one or two buildings
at the north gate. We liked A&M so much that Mr.
Jackson bought a tract of land from the north gate
down to the Brine,
down to the city of Brine. He bought nine acres
right in there. And you know, before we could build
a house on it, we had to put on our own lives, water,
and gas. We had to put all that in ourselves to get it
to our own home. And of course, everybody that
hooked on then as the town grew. Everybody hooked
on, tied on to ours. We eventually got our money
back and made a little bit, but that's how barren
everything. My house was the only one on that side
of the house, and you want to know how come you
didn't get that house? They had a load of
three-room parsons in the bath that the former
pastor had used, and they wanted to sell it and
build the pastor a decent home. So they had Dodgers
struck. Those little old Leafers just give out,
you know, having an auction. And there's been an
auction that three-room house off. It was a real
cold day, and you know, people aren't very
responsive when it's cold. So my husband thought,
well, he'd just make a bid on it just to get it
started. And you know what happened? He bid $100,
and one of our members was there, and he just
wriggled around through that audience like a
snake. He said, don't outbid that preacher. It's
not worth any more than that. He said, let him have
it. I don't know what he wants with it. But he said,
let him have it if he wants. And wouldn't anybody
outbid us? And there he was with that thing on his
hand. We didn't have an inch of ground in the world
to set it on. And it had to be off by a certain time.
You see, that was the main idea was to get rid of the
thing, get it off the lot there so they could build
the other one. So we had time to find anybody to sell
us any land. Boyd owned most of it on that side of
town. And he was only allowed to sell. enough to pay
the taxes. See, it was all tied up in the state. So he
was allowed to sell enough to pay his taxes. And
that's how we got four or five little lots over
there to set that house on. Well, then you live
pretty close to the campus because Boyett Street
is just on this side of University Drive. Pardon?
You live right on the other side. Oh, yes. See, I
just live two blocks from the post office. My
apartment's, I have 13 apartments over there now.
And before we got that little old three-room house
moved down there, everybody in town tried to rent.
You know, there wasn't any apartments around
here. No, no, nothing. And everybody was trying to
find a place to live. And so Mr. Jackson conceived
the idea that if they were that much in demand, he'd
just get it down there and make it a two-story
house. And he did, and it's been around ever since.
And then we built our own home on the big corner lot.
Eight bedrooms and five baths. And I kept those
girls. They didn't have any motels or hotels. or
anything and so when the boys had their dates they
had to stay in private homes and I could keep 16 you
see easy and the night you know they built that slab
over there you know where I'm talking about the
slab where they had the outdoor dance I don't know
how you do or not it's over there in that old shell
looking building close to the Well, okay, the
night that opened up, I had eight cots. My living
room was bigger than this over there. And I had
eight cots just right along there. And I slept in
the kitchen on the cot. Everybody wanted to come,
and there was nowhere to put them. And mothers
would call me from Galveston or San Antonio or
anywhere, and they said, well, they all knew I was a
minister's wife, and they knew I run a decent
place. And they'd say, I don't care where you put
her. Just let her sleep anywhere, just so I know
she's down there with you. And that's what we had.
And so I didn't know that my son and Mr. Jackson were
coming. And lo and behold, about the time the girls
were all dressing and so on, here came my husband.
He was pastor of a church in Houston. And so... When
they came, there wasn't a place anywhere in the
house they could go without seeing your old woman
anywhere. They had to drive clear back to Houston.
My own husband and my own son couldn't find a place
to stay in college. Dad said, if you ever do this
again, you don't have to do that. And I said, well,
they just kept coming. I didn't know what to do, and
I didn't know you were coming. And while I was here
in Mr. Jackson and Houston, I must explain that.
See, that was right after I'd gotten out of the
hospital. And I couldn't do my, I couldn't play my
role as a minister's wife. I tried it. I went down
there with him after the appointment was made in
Houston. And, oh, every time I do anything, the
church, they'd send me back to the hospital. So the
bishop, the man that was out right over us, he said,
don't you have a relative? Couldn't you send her
anywhere? I said, she just can't do this. I said, it
would kill her. I took everything so seriously
because I love my work and We worked many times and
never would do a bid. So we conceived the idea of me
coming up here and running that house instead of
renting it out. So that's why I was here and my
husband was down there. I want to make that clear.
But, oh, I had so many rich and rare and real
experiences in that house, both with the boys and
the girls. It was just a... I'd always wanted a
girl, and I had the sweetest little red-headed boy
you ever did see. But then once I had all the girls
and boys, too, I could manage.
Was there any big happenings here, like any of the
floods or anything? Or drafts that you remember
that really affected your job? No, we were here
during the Depression, but that's like it is now.
The people on the campus don't know anything about
it. They don't depend on crops failures and so on.
They get their checks through the fiscal office
just like they do now. We were here. No, we didn't
have any drafts. How was the depression, though? I
mean, the people on the campus? Well, the people on
campus didn't know this having one. That's what I
said. They got their checks every month anyway.
And most of them lived on the campus in those
faculty homes, you see. Most of them lived on
campus. And so we didn't realize this having one.
We got our check every month. They got theirs. See,
a lot of these people that have to depend on their
crops and their cattle and things like that. They
do feel it, but we didn't have any of those kind of
people here. We just had seven men on our fishing
board at that time. Now they have between 50 and 60,
I think. So you see, that's how things have been.
Well, how did it affect the other people? I mean,
besides, didn't it sort of slow down the work here?
It slowed down with the boys, I think. They were
pretty hard. The boys were kids harder than we did,
and that's when they, well, I don't know how to
express it. They had these what they called
project houses, and they'd rent a great big house
and put as many boys, and the college would rent the
house, put a matron over it. and put as many boys in
there as they could possibly squeeze in, bunk beds
and what have you. And the only way they could go to
school was to bring enough out of their deep
freezers at home or enough eggs or butter or
something to put in that kitchen. Every boy
brought his share, you see. And then this lady that
they had hired to run that thing cook and serve now
that it did affect the boys that way because a lot of
the boys couldn't come to school for what they call
those project houses but and yet the boys that
lived like that crowded areas and they'd go home
intermittently and bring them back enough and you
know what they'd do they'd bring me back a roast too
I got fed like they did. And they just, and yet they
made the best grades of anybody. They made the best
grades of anybody. They realized, you know, what
they were here for.
Well, did it affect these businesses down in
Bryan? I notice there's a lot of old businesses
there that look like that. Well, they recently,
it's just gradually deteriorated. When we were
here, brine was at its height because it wasn't
anything out of college, you see. There was no
stores and things like that at college. Oh, just
something here and there and yonder and in the
mountains, anything. We all had to do all of our
shopping at brine, even our, most of our
groceries, we had to buy it down there. No,
college-fed brine. You see, it always has. It
still does. No, Brian has just gradually gone down
because college has gone up. Everything's come
this way, you see. No, I don't think Brian felt it
like most towns do because they had college here to
feed them. See, most towns didn't have that. And it
did make a difference. But any churches here...
Well, the Presbyterian Church and the Episcopal
Church,
I think they met in the YMCA. And the Lutheran
Church met in what was once Guyon Hall. Of course,
that's been torn down. You may not be familiar with
that. But anyway, you see, it was a situation. They
didn't have any school, any grammar school. I sent
my son, Brian, to Allen Academy. Oh, they had just a
low-frame building where the kids on the campus
went, but it wasn't adequate. I wouldn't have sent
mine there. The professors did because... Well,
it moved them, too, to see. They were in a tough spot
there, but I was in a different spot. So I sent mine,
too. No, just everything has changed so much. But
I'd rather you'd ask me the questions, because I
don't know what you're going to do. But did it
really start growing, or... Did the war really
affect it after the Depression and then the war?
Yes. When the war came, you've seen the plaque on
the student center of how many boys. In fact, A&M
boys won the war. And several of our boys that were
the most faithful ones in the church gave their
lives for your freedom and mine. One day here,
there was two or three boys. We got messages of two
or three the same day. The whole campus was in
tears. Just the whole campus was in tears. Yes, it
began to grow after that. The boys came home and
business, you know, everywhere was just
different. And the situations in their hometowns
were different. You see, so it began to go right to
that. And I just can't believe they got 20,000 out
there. I just can't believe they got 20,000 boys
out that college, and girls. And when we were here,
there was four or five girls on the campus. Three of
them were old maids, and the Aggies wouldn't look
at them. They were too old. And the other three were
high school girls, and they were too young. So when
we had parties for the boys, And party was my middle
name. We've always worked with young people.
That's been my responsibility ever since we were
married. And I figured if I played with them all
week, they'd come and pray with me on Sunday. And
they did. The house was always full. But when I'd
have my parties, I'd have to go to Brian. Well, I had
two or three girls at Brian that I phoned. And they
filled their cars up full. See, the boys weren't
allowed to go with them. Oh, there'd been such a
change in that campus. And when the party was over
at 11, 30, or 12-something, they had to be back up to
college. And Dad and I would have to take those
girls home, you know. Me and I, I never did go to bed.
But I was having such a good time, and I was young and
gay then. I didn't mind it. I didn't mind it.
But when did they... They used to commute by this
railroad. Yes, now that was for my day. That was for
my day. The railroad wasn't here. The little
trolley wasn't here. The tracks had already been
up and everything when we came. See, those are in
the code, too. No, the boys didn't have, I'll tell
you how they got to Brian. We didn't have a picture
show or anything out here, and they just
hitchhiked. You'd see 8 and 10 or 12 on the corner,
and everybody would pick them up, just as many as
they could hang on the car, including me. And now
they won't even stop for them. They're afraid to.
Well, and then with 20,000, you're bound to get a
few you don't want. No, they just did their
hitchhiking instead of using that trolley.
But I think one of the biggest changes that's been
made, I don't know if you want this or not, is in that
campus. See, there wasn't any of those buildings
there. It was just all... campus, except a few
streets that had those professors' phones on it.
And the rest of it was just me. I've sat here and
watched it, but I don't believe it. Watched it grow
and still don't believe it. But now there's every
denomination in the world here at church on every
corner. But you said when y'all first came here,
there were only two churches? Our church and the
Presbyterian didn't have a church. They met in the
Y. And so did the Episcopalians. And the Lutherans
had rooms in the Guyon Hall. But they had their
morning services, and then they worshipped with
us in the evening. They worshipped with us in the
evening. We had pretty nice evening services.
Brother, I mean, Major Dunn was a drunk, wasn't he?
had charge of the band then. And he would bring, oh,
18 or 20 of those band members at our church on
Sunday night. And Mrs. Norton, the coach's wife,
was our pianist. So we were very much involved with
A&M. And those two people would really draw a
crowd. And Coach Norton had a daughter that would
draw a crowd anywhere. She'd come with her mother.
Well, were the churches in Bryan pretty well
established, and the students weren't going to
there? No, they wouldn't. Well, they had no way of
getting there. You see, in the first place, they
had no way of getting there. And our
church and the, oh yes, the Baptist church was
here. I didn't mention them. They were here. They
had a little church here. And Brother... Brother
Brown and Brother Anson and my husband were the
three main pastors. The other churches that I met,
the Presbyterians and the Episcopalians, they
really didn't have a pastor. They just met and had
Sunday school in those buildings up there. You
see, just to hold the group together. But now,
everybody, including the Jews, well, everybody,
the Church of Christ, the Seventh-day
Adventists, they all have churches now, as you
know. But ours and the Baptist's
were the only two real permanent churches on the
campus.
You mentioned one thing, how being here affected
me and what it had done to me. It did a lot. It just did
a lot for me, for those boys. Well, they were the
sweetest mean boys I ever saw. They were just
sweet, but they'd play every kind of joke on you, on
Earth. And yet they were just perfect gentlemen.
And you hear now of so much thievery going on and
stealing and things like that. You never heard of
such a thing then. In fact, one of the boys made his
way through school by selling homemade candy. I
think his mother gave him a lift at that point. And
you know what he did? He had a table in one of those
halls up there and would put it out in a box and cover
it with cellophane paper and everything where it
was sanitary. And with another box, two pieces for
a nickel. And he said he never lost a dime. Nobody
would take a piece of candy without dropping a
nickel in that plate. And now here they rest them
every night for students. See, it's a
different... And when you had boys like that, you
know, they did something for you. I just loved them
for their, well, for their inward search and their
outward reach and their upward look. They were
that type of boys. We were sent here to help them,
and they helped us because we wouldn't have
betrayed their confidence for anything in the
world. And I had the pleasure of having so many of
their mothers at home on Mother's Day. You know,
and things like that. And when they come down, I
keep their mothers, a lot of them, in the homes. So
it was a very happy relationship. And that's why we
decided right then we wanted to stay here the rest
of our lives. Because we thought every one of those
20,000 agas were going to be just like that 900.
And many of them are. Many of them are. You wouldn't
expect to find a few in 20,000.
You know. Della and I were talking on our way up. I
don't know, are you familiar with Mom's, this
boarding house that used to be back on the other
side? No. I was just wondering, I thought maybe you
might know her. Evidently she'd been here for, you
know, since the war or something like that,
selling meals, homemade meals. It's on 25th
Street. That wasn't the Bell, Ms. Farmer, the Bell
home, was it? You know, I'm not familiar with that.
I'm just curious on that. No, I wish I could give you
some information on that. It's an itty place where
a lot of Aggies go out there, and the food is really
expensive. It used to be like, for a dollar a plate,
all you would want. A lot of Aggies went out there.
And we're just trying to figure out how long
they've been there. Because I didn't know. I know I
had been out there about three years ago, and he had
been there. Well, I'll tell you. Since my son
graduated from A&M, and my husband was no longer on
the faculty, I've lost contact with a lot of these
things that have been in vogue, I'd say, since
then, you see. And I've never, I don't believe I've
ever heard of Moms. There used to be a Mrs. Bell here
right across the street from the First Methodist
Church that served homemade meals. And boy, the
boys sure flocked in there. And she served one for a
dollar meal. And she just put it on a big, long
table. And boy, you just eat until you... Sounds
like moms. It must be similar. But I'm not familiar
with that. I'm sorry. But since you lost contact
with the college, you're working locally with a
community now? Yes, I'm still a member of the
church. My husband's pastor of the A&M Methodist
Church. And he also served as a Wesley Foundation
director and taught religious education in the
college. He had a big Bible class in the college.
They don't have that anymore. I don't know why that
would discontinue. But he had a big class, and he
was so proud of them. And they were excellent
students. And if they deserved an A, he gave it to
them. And they called him in one time. It seemed to
be a rule that you just give so many A's and flunk the
rest of them to make them, you know how that goes.
Well, Mr. Jackson said, I just cannot do that. He
said, if they deserve an A, I've just got to give it
to them. And he said, I'll let you have their
papers, anybody that's familiar with the Bible.
And if you can't give them, if you see where I've
made a mistake, he said, I'll correct it. You see,
we had three, now over here at our church, now that
he was pastor for four years, they have three
ministers
and a Wesley Foundation worker, and they have four
or five secretaries, paid, all paid. And when we
were here, we had the whole thing by ourselves. But
we only had 900 boys, whereas they have 20.
I don't know. 20,000. I couldn't say it. 20,000. So
there's a lot of difference. What about the people
who sort of settled into College Station and Bryan
since you've been here? Has the main reason been
the school, or are they really just different
people coming in for the job? Well, I believe a lot
of them. I mean, I won't say a lot of them. I'll crack
myself there and say a part of them have come on
account of the schools. both A&M and Allen
Academy. But most of them, I believe, have come
from a commercial standpoint because this is the
fastest growing area, you know, anywhere. And I
think they've come here from a commercial
standpoint more than they have the schools. You
hate to think that, you know, but I just will be
honest with you. I do believe that this is true
because we have so many things that don't even
pertain to the college that they come in here and
all these pizza huts and hamburgers and things
like that of course they've come to mcdowell but
now the the we didn't have a motel